=== PAGE 6 ===
4. Regulation for pre-packing and sale etc. of commodities in packaged form..
- On and from the commencement of these rules, no person shall pre-pack or cause or permit to be pre-packed any.
commodity for sale, distribution or delivery unless the package in which the commodity is pre-packed bears thereon, or on.
a label is securely affixed thereto, such declarations as are required to be made under these rules..
Explanation. - The existence of packages without the declaration of retail sale price within the manufacturer's premises
shall not be construed as a violation of these rules and it shall be ensured that all packages leaving the premises of
manufacturer for their destination shall have declaration of retail sale price on them as required in this rule..
5. Specific commodities to be packed and sold in recommended standard packages.
- The commodities speCified in the Second Schedule shall be packed for sale, distribution or delivery in such standard.
quantities as are specified in that Schedule:
[Provided that if the Competent Authority under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955) fixed and notified the.
standard quantity of any essential commodity, the standard quantity of such essential commodities as fixed and notified.
shall prevail.] [Inserted by Notification 858(E), dated 7.9.2016 (w.e.f. 7.3.2011).]
6. Declarations to be made on every package.
(1).
Every package shall bear thereon or on label securely affixed thereto, a definite, plain and conspicuous declaration.
made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as, to-.
(a).
the name and address of the manufacturer, or where the manufacturer is not the packer, the name and.
address of the manufacturer and packer and for any imported package the name and address of the importer
shall be mentioned
Explanation I. - If any name and address of a company is mentioned on the label without any qualifying words
manufactured by' or 'packed by', it shall be presumed that such name and address shall be that of the manufacturer.
and the liability shall be determined accordingly;

=== PAGE 7 ===
Explanation II. - If the brand name and address of the brand owner appear on the label as a marketer, then the brand.
owner shall be held responsible for any violation of these rules and action as may be required shall be initiated
against the deemed manufacturer and in the event of more than one name and address appearing in the label,
prosecution shall be launched against the manufacturer indicated on the label in the first place and not against all of.
them.
Explanation III. - In respect of packages containing food articles, the provisions of this clause shall not apply, but
the provisions of, and the requirements specified in the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006) and the
rules made thereunder shall apply;] [Substituted 'In respect of packages containing food articles, the provisions of this sub-.
rule shall not apply, and instead, the requirement of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954) and the rules.
made there under shall apply' by Notification No. G.S.R. 629(E), dated 23.6.2017 (w.e.f. 7.3.2011).]
(aa).
[ The name of the country of origin or manufacture or assembly in case of imported products shall be
mentioned on the package;] [Inserted by Notification No. G.S.R. 629(E), dated 23.6.2017 (w.e.f. 7.3.2011).]
(b)
The common or generic names of the commodity contained in the package and in case of packages with more
than one product, the name and number or quantity of each product shall be mentioned on the package.
(c).
The net quantity, in terms of the standard unit of weight or measure, of the commodity contained in the
package or where the commodity is packed or sold by number, the number of the commodity contained in
the package shall be mentioned.
(d)
The month and year in which the commodity is manufactured or pre-packed or imported shall be mentioned.
in the package:
Provided that for packages containing food articles, the provisions of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 1954
(37 of 1954) and the rules made there under shall apply:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall apply in case of packages containing seeds which are labeled
and certified under the provisions of the Seeds Act, 1966 (54 of 1966) and the rules made there under:.
Provided that a manufacturer may indicate the month and year using a rubber stamp without overwriting:.

=== PAGE 8 ===
Provided also that for packages containing cosmetics products, the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules,
1945 shall apply.
(da).
[ If a package contains a commodity which may become unfit for human consumption after a period of time
the `best before or use by the date, month and year' shall also be mentioned on the label: [Inserted by
Notification No. G.S.R. 629(E), dated 23.6.2017 (w.e.f. 7.3.2011).]
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply if a provision in this regard is made in any other law.
Explanation. - 1. For the purposes of this sub-rule,-
(a)
the expression "best before" means the date which signifies the end of the period under any stated storage
conditions during which the product shall remain fully marketable and shall retain any specific qualities for
which tacit or express claims have been made and beyond the date commodity may still be safe for
consumption;
(b)
the expression "Use by Date" means the date which signifies the end of the estimated period under any stated
storage conditions after which the product shall not have the quality attributes normally expected by the
consumers and after this date, the commodity should not be regarded as marketable.]
(e).
the retail sale price of the package [shall clearly indicate that it is the maximum retail price inclusive of all
taxes and the price in rupees and paise be rounded off to the nearest rupee or 50 paise; [Inserted by Notification
No. G.S.R. 629(E), dated 23.6.2017 (w.e.f. 7.3.2011).]
Illustrations. - for declaration of retail sale price:
(a)
Maximum or Max. retail price Rs. or  xx.xx (inclusive of all taxes), or
(b)
Maximum or Max. retail price Rs. or  xx.xx inclusive of all taxes, or
(c)
MRP Rs. or  xx.xx incl. of all taxes, or
(d)
MRP Rs. or  xx.xx (incl. of all taxes):]
Provided that for packages containing alcoholic beverages or spirituous liquor, the State Excise Laws and the rules
made there under shall be applicable within the State in which it is manufactured and where the state excise laws

=== PAGE 9 ===
and rules made there under do not provide for declaration of retail sale price, the provisions of these rules shall.
apply.
[Provided further that if the retail sale price of any essential commodity is fixed and notified by the Competent.
Authority under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 the same shall apply.] [Inserted by Notification No. G.S.R.
858(E), dated 7.9.2016 (w.e.f. 7.3.2011).]
(f).
Where the sizes of the commodity contained in the package are relevant, the dimensions of the commodity
contained in the package and if the dimensions of the different pieces are different, the dimensions of each
such different piece shall be mentioned..
(g)
such other matter as are specified in these rules:.
Provided that -
(A)
no declaration as to the month and year in which the commodity is manufactured or pre-packed shall be.
required to be made on-
(i)
any package containing bidi or incense sticks;.
(ii)
any domestic liquefied petroleum gas cylinder of 14.2kg or 5kg, bottled and marketed by a public.
sector undertaking;
(B)
where any packaging material bearing thereon the month in which any commodity was expected to have.
been pre-packed is not exhausted during that month, such packaging material may be used for pre-packing
the concerned commodity produced or manufactured during the next succeeding month and not there after,
but the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that such packaging material could not be exhausted during.
the period aforesaid by reason of any circumstance beyond the control of the manufacturer or packer as the
case may be extend the time during which such packaging material may be used, and, where any such
packaging material is exhausted before the expiry of the month indicated thereon, the packaging material
intended to be used during the next succeeding month may be used for pre-packing the concerned
commodity:

=== PAGE 10 ===
Provided that the said provision shall not apply to the packages containing food products, where the 'Best before or
Use before' period is ninety days or less from the date of manufacture or packing.
(C)
no declaration as to the retail sale price shall be required to be made on
(i)
any package containing bidi;
(ii)
any domestic liquefied petroleum gas cylinder of which the price is covered under the Administrative
Price Mechanism of the Government.
Explanation I: The month and the year in which commodity is pre-packed may be expressed either in words, or by
numerals indicating the month and the year, or by both.
(2)
[ Every package shall bear the name, address, telephone number, E-mail address of the person who can be or the
office which can be or the office which can be contacted, in case of consumer complaints.] [Substituted by Notification
No. G.S.R. 385(E), dated 14.5.2015 (w.e.f. 1.1.2016).]
(3)
It shall not be permissible to affix individual stickers on the package for altering or making declaration required
under these rules:
Provided that for reducing the Maximum Retail Price (MRP), a sticker with the revised lower MRP (inclusive of all
taxes) may be affixed and the same shall not cover the MRP declaration made by the manufacturer or the packer, as
the case may be, on the label of the package.
(4)
It shall be permissible to use stickers for making any declaration other than the declaration required to be made
under these rules.
(4A)
[ Nothing in this rule shall preclude a manufacturer or packer or importer to declare the following on the package
in addition to the mandatory declarations-
(a).
Barcode or GTIN or QR Code;
(b).
e-code' for net quantity assurance of the commodity and other required declarations, after obtaining the same
in the manner as specified by the Central Government;

=== PAGE 11 ===
(c).
logos of Government schemes, such as Swatch Bharat Mission, where such use is authorised by the Central
Government.]
(5)
Where a commodity consists of a number of components and these components are packed in two or more units, for
sale as a single commodity, the declaration required to be made under sub-rule (1) shall appear on the main package
and such package shall also carry information about the other accompanying packages or such declaration may be
given on individual packages and intimation to that effect may be given on the main package and if the components
are sold as spare parts, all declarations shall be given on each package.
7. Principal display panel-its area, size and letter etc
- (1) In the case of a package having a capacity of [ten cubic centimeter] [Substituted by Notification No. G.S.R. 385(E), dated
14.5.2015 (w.e.f. 1.1.2016).] or less, the principal display panel may be a card or tape affixed firmly to the package and shall
bear the required information..
(2)
[ The height of any numeral and letter in the declaration required under these rules shall be as per Table-I.]
[[Substituted 'The height of any numeral in the declaration required under these rules, on the principal display
panel shall not be less than,-.
(i).
as shown in Table-I, if the net quantity is declared in terms of weight or volume;
(ii).
as shown in Table-II, if the net quantity is declared in terms of length, area or number.' by Notification No.
G.S.R. 629(E), dated 23.6.2017 (w.e.f. 7.3.2011).1]
(3)
[ The width of the letter or numeral shall not be less than one third of its height, except in the case of numeral "1'
and letters (i), (I) and (1);1 [Substituted 'The height of letters in the declaration shall not be less than 1 mm height and when
blown, formed, molded, embossed or perforated, the height of letters shall not be less than 2 mm.' by Notification No. G.S.R.
629(E), dated 23.6.2017 (w.e.f. 7.3.2011).]
Provided that the width of the letter or numeral shall not be less than one third of its height, except in the case of
numeral '1' and letters (i), (I) and (l);
[Table-I] [Substituted by Notification No. G.S.R. 629(E), dated 23.6.2017 (w.e.f. 7.3.2011).]

=== PAGE 12 ===
Minimum height of numeral.
Serial
Area of Principal display
Minimum height of
Minimum height of numerals and letters.
Number
panel in square.
numerals and letters in
when
centimeters (A)
millimeters
blown, formed or molded on surface of.
container in millimeters
(1)
(2)
(3)
1
A < 50
1.0
1.5
2
50 < A <100
1.5
3.0
3
100 < A < 500
2.5
4.0
4
500 < A < 2500
4.0
6.0
5
2500< A
6.0
6.0
[Table-II] [Omitted by Notification No. G.S.R. 629(E), dated 23.6.2017 (w.e.f. 7.3.2011).]
Inserted by Notification No. G.S.R. 629(E), dated 23.6.2017 (w.e.f. 7.3.2011).J
Table-II
Minimum height of
numeral
{l
Serial Number
Net quantity in length, area or
Minimum height in
number, area of
mm
principal display panel

=== PAGE 13 ===
Normal case
When blown, formed, molded.
embossed or
perforated on container
1
Upto 100 cm2
1
2
2
Above 100 cm2and upto 500 cm2
2
4
3
Above 500 cm2and upto 2500 cm2
4
6
4
Above 2500 cm2
6
6
I}
(4)
[ The area not including the top, bottom, flange at top and bottom of cans, and shoulders and neck of bottle and jars
shall be determined in the following manner, namely:-.
(a).
in the case of a rectangular package, where one entire side can properly be considered to be the principal
display panel side, the product of the height multiplied by the width of that side;
(b).
in case of a cylindrical or nearly cylindrical package, 40 per cent. of the product of the height of the package
multiplied by the circumference;
(c).
in case of any other shaped package , 40 per cent. of the total surface of the package, or an area considered to
be a principal display panel of the package..
(5).
Except size of the numbers and letters for declaring net weight, retail sale price, date of expiry or best before or use
by date (wherever and as applicable) and consumer care details, the provisions under sub-rules (1) to (4) shall not
apply to a package if the information to be specified on such package under this rule is also required to be given by
or under any other law for the time being in force.] [[Substituted '(4) The provisions under sub-rule (1) to (3) shall
not apply to a package if the information to be specified on such package under this rule is also required to be given.
by or under any other law for the time being in force.

=== PAGE 14 ===
(5)
the area not including the top, bottom, flange at top and bottom of cans, and shoulders and neck of bottle and jars.
shall be determined as follows, namely:-
(a)
in the case of a rectangular package, where one entire side can properly be considered to be the principal
display panel side, the product of the height multiplied by the width of that side.
(b)
in case of a cylindrical or nearly cylindrical package, 40 per cent of the product of the height of the package
multiplied by the circumference.
(c)
in case of any other shaped package, 40 per cent of the total surface of the package, or an area considered to.
be a principal display panel of the package' by Notification No. G.S.R. 629(E), dated 23.6.2017 (w.e.f.
7.3.2011).1]
8. Declaration where to appear.
(1)
Every declaration required to be made under these rules shall appear on the principal display panel.
Provided that the area surrounding the quantity declaration shall be free from printed information..
(a).
above and below by a space equal to at least the height of the numeral in the declaration, and.
(b).
to the left and right by a space at least twice the height of numeral in the declaration.
(2).
For soft drink, ready to serve fruit beverages or the like, the bottle which is returnable by the consumer for being
refilled, the retail sale price may be Indicated either on the crown cap, or on the bottle or on both and if the retail sale
price is indicated on the crown cap or the bottle, it is sufficient to indicate the retail sale price in the form of 'MRP Rs
I? ....'.
9. Manner in which declaration shall be made.
(1)
Every declaration which is required to be made on a package under these rules shall be -
(a).
legible and prominent;

=== PAGE 15 ===
(b)
numerals of the retail sale price and net quantity declaration shall be printed, painted or inscribed on the
package in a colour that contrasts conspicuously with the background of the label;.
Provided that,-
(a)
where any label information is blown, formed or moulded on a glass or plastic surface such information need
not be required to be presented in a contrasting colour;.
(b)
where any declaration on a package is printed either in the form of handwriting or hand-script, such
declaration shall be clear, unambiguous and legible.
(2).
No declaration shall be made so as to require it to be read through any liquid commodity contained in the package
(3)
Where a package is provided with an outside container or wrapper such container or wrapper shall also contain all
the declarations which are required to appear on the package except where such container or wrapper itself is
transparent and the declarations on the package itself are easily readable through such outside container or
wrapper.
[Provided that no such declarations on the inner package is required, if the outer package contains all declarations
required under these rules.] [Inserted by Notification No. G.S.R. 629(E), dated 23.6.2017 (w.e.f. 7.3.2011).]
[* * *] [Omitted proviso by Notification No. G.S.R. 385(E), dated 14.5.2015 (w.e.f. 1.1.2016).]
(4).
The particulars of the declarations required to be specified under this rule on a package shall either be in Hindi in
Devnagri script or in English:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-rule shall prevent the use of any other language in addition to Hindi or
English language..
10. Declaration of name and address of the manufacturer, etc..
(1)
Subject to the provisions of rule 6, every package kept, offered or exposed for sale or sold shall bear conspicuously
on it, the name and complete address of the manufacturer, or where the manufacturer is not the packer, the name
and address of the manufacturer and the packer and in case of imported packages, the name and address of the
importer:

=== PAGE 16 ===
Provided that for packages of capacity [10 cubic cm or less] [Substituted '5 cubic cm or less' by Notification No. G.S.R
629(E), dated 23.6.2017 (w.e.f. 7.3.2011).], it shall be a sufficient compliance of this sub-rule, if a mark or inscription
which would enable the consumer to identify the manufacturer or packer or the importer, as the case may be, is
made on the package:
Provided further that where any commodity manufactured outside India is packed in India, the package shall also
contain on the principal display panel the name and complete address of the packer or the importer in India.
[Explanation I. - In this sub-rule, 'complete address' means, the postal address at which the factory is situated or
company or firm is registered, and, in any other case, the name of the street, number (if any) assigned to the
premises of the manufacturer or packer or importer and the name of the city and State where the business is carried.
on by the manufacturer or packer or importer and the Postal Index Number [PIN] Code so that a consumer can
identify and locate the manufacturer or packer or importer, as the case may be.] [Substituted by Notification No. G.S.R.
629(E), dated 23.6.2017 (w.e.f. 7.3.2011).]
(2).
The name of the manufacturer or packer or importer shall be the actual corporate name, or if not incorporated, the.
name under which the business is conducted by such manufacturer or packer or importer in India.
11. General provisions relating to declaration of quantity.
(1)
In declaring the net quantity of the commodity contained in a package, the weight of wrappers and materials other
than the commodity shall be excluded.-
(2).
Where a commodity in a package is not likely to undergo any variation in weight or measure, on account of the
environmental conditions, the quantity declared on the package shall correspond to the net quantity which will be
received by the consumer, and the declaration of quantity of such package shall not be qualified by the words 'when
packed' or the like.